# Introduction

The DNSSEC [](#RFC4033) [](#RFC4033) [](#RFC4035) DS Resource Record [](#RFC3658) 
is published in parent zones to distribute a cryptographic digest of one key in a child's
DNSKEY RRset.  

When NSEC3 [](#RFC5155) was deployed the known algorithms were aliased to indicate
to resolvers that the zone was using NSEC3. Resolvers that did not know
about these new identifiers would treat the zone as insecure 
(Section 5.2 of [](#RFC4035) and Section 2 of [](#RFC5155)). This aliasing is
called an algorithm rollover and is expensive with respect to the amount of
available algorithms, which is limited to 255. 

Section 12.1.3. of [](#RFC5155) does not specify a transition mechanism to use
new hash algorithms in NSEC3, except to resort to an algorithm rollover.

This document outlines a transition mechanism to new hash algorithms that
can be used in NSEC3. This transition mechanism can also be used to transition
to NSEC4 (TODO:REF).

The term "denial type" used in this document indicates the type
of authenticated denial of existence in use at a zone.

In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
"SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in [](#RFC2119).

# Implementing Denial Type Support in DS Records

This document specifies that the denial type codes TBD, TBD, ..., TBD 
have been assigned for use within DS records. 

Zone operators should be aware that changes to their zones' denial of existence method
require uploading a new DS record with the new Denial Type to their parent.

# DS Record Field Values

Indicating the denial type in use at the child zone is done by
prefixing the digest in the DS record with two octects defining
the denial type.

Denial type: 
:   A 16 bit value, see [](#iana-considerations) for the defined values.

Digest: 
:   The digest value is calculated by using the following
    formula ("|" denotes concatenation, HASH denotes that 
    hash algorithm in use).

        digest = denial type | HASH(DNSKEY owner name | DNSKEY RDATA)

    where DNSKEY RDATA is defined by [](#RFC4034) as:

        DNSKEY RDATA = Flags | Protocol | Algorithm | Public Key

   The Key Tag field and Algorithm fields remain unchanged by this
   document and are specified in the [](#RFC4034) specification.

##  DS Record with Denial Type Wire Format

The resulting on-the-wire format for the resulting DS record will be
as follows:

                          1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |           Key Tag             |  Algorithm    |  DigestType   |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |          Denial Type          |                               /
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+          Digest               /
     /                                                               /
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-|
^[fig:wire::The on-the-wire format for the DS. The length of the digest is specified in the respective RFCs defining the digest type.]

##  Example DS Record Using SHA-256 and Denial Type TBD

The following is an example DNSKEY, and a matching DS record that 
includes denial type TBD that refences that NSEC3/SHA1 is in use in 
the child zone. This
DNSKEY record comes from the example DNSKEY/DS records found in
section 5.4 of [](#RFC4034).

The DNSKEY record:

    dskey.example.com. 86400 IN DNSKEY 256 3 5 ( AQOeiiR0GOMYkDshWoSKz9Xz
                                              fwJr1AYtsmx3TGkJaNXVbfi/
                                              2pHm822aJ5iI9BMzNXxeYCmZ
                                              DRD99WYwYqUSdjMmmAphXdvx
                                              egXd/M5+X7OrzKBaMbCVdFLU
                                              Uh6DhweJBjEVv5f2wwjM9Xzc
                                              nOf+EPbtG9DMBmADjFDc2w/r
                                              ljwvFw==) ;  key id = 60485

The resulting DS record covering the above DNSKEY record using a
SHA-256 digest and the Denial Type 2 (.i.e. the current NSEC3 record):

    dskey.example.com. 86400 IN DS 60485 5 TBD ( 02D4B7D520E7BB5F0F67674A0C
                                                CEB1E3E0614B93C4F9E99B8383
                                                F6A1E4469DA50A )

# Implementation Requirements

Implementation implenting support for Denial Type in DS RRs MUST
support all previous types too. TODO(miek): better

# Deployment Considerations

If a validator does not support the TBD, TBD, .. TBD digest types and no other
DS RR exists in a zone's DS RRset with a supported digest type, then
the validator has no supported authentication path leading from the
parent to the child.  The resolver should treat this case as it would
the case of an authenticated NSEC/NSEC3 RRset proving that no DS RRset
exists, as described in [](#RFC4035), Section 5.2 and [](#RFC5155), Section X.X.

Because zone administrators cannot control the deployment speed of
support these new digest types in validators that may be referencing any of
their zones, zone operators should consider deploying both older and
supported digest type based DS records.
This should be done for every DNSKEY for
which DS records are being generated.  Whether to make use of both
digest types and for how long is a policy decision that extends
beyond the scope of this document.

# IANA Considerations

The following action for IANA are required by this document:

The Digest Types to be used for supporting Denial Type information within
DS records has been assigned by IANA.

At the time of this writing, the current digest types assigned for
use in DS records are as follows:

      VALUE     Digest Type          Status
        0       Reserved                -
        1       SHA-1                MANDATORY
        2       SHA-256              MANDATORY
        3       GOST R 34.11-94      OPTIONAL
        4       SHA-384              OPTIONAL
        TBD     DT-SHA-1             OPTIONAL
        TBD     DT-SHA-256           OPTIONAL
        TBD     DT-GOST R 34.11-94   OPTIONAL
        TBD     DT-SHA-384           OPTIONAL

       9-255    Unassigned              -

All future assigned Digest Types MUST assume that there is a Denial Type                                                                      incorporated in the Digest.

This document creates a new IANA registry for Denial Types.  This
registry is named "DNSSEC DENIAL TYPES".  The initial contents of this
registry are:

      VALUE     Denial Type              Reference
        0       Reserved                 This document
        1       NSEC                     [](#RFC4034)
        2       NSEC3 w/ SHA-1           [](#RFC5155)
        3       NSEC3 w/ SHA-256            -
        4       NSEC3 w/ SHA-384            -
        5       NSEC4 w/ SHA-1           [](NSEC4-REF)
        6       NSEC4 w/ SHA-256         [](NSEC4-REF)
        7       NSEC4 w/ SHA-384         [](NSEC4-REF)
        8       NSEC3 w/ GOST R 34.11-94    -
        9       NSEC4 w/ GOST R 34.11-94 [](NSEC4-REF)

    10-65535    Unassigned                  -

Validators who understand the new Digest Types (that indicate Signaling
Type of Denial via Delegation Signer Records) MUST also implement NSEC4.

# Security Considerations

Include security consideration from RFC 4509.

# Acknowledgements

The idea for this draft comes from Mark Andrews.
